# **Methods of primitives** ((link resource)[https://javascript.info/primitives-methods])

A primitive

-   Is a value of a primitive type.
-   There are 7 primitive types: <code>string</code>, <code>number</code>, <code>bigint</code>, <code>boolean</code>, <code>symbol</code>, <code>null</code> and <code>undefined</code>.

An object

-   Is capable of storing multiple values as properties.
-   Can be created with <code>{}</code>, for instance: <code>{name: "John", age: 30}</code>. There are other kinds of objects in JavaScript: functions, for example, are objects.

## **A primitive as an object**

Here’s the paradox faced by the creator of JavaScript:

-   There are many things one would want to do with a primitive, like a string or a number. It would be great to access them using methods.
-   Primitives must be as fast and lightweight as possible.

The solution looks a little bit awkward, but here it is:

-   Primitives are still primitive. A single value, as desired.
-   The language allows access to methods and properties of strings, numbers, booleans and symbols.
-   In order for that to work, a special “object wrapper” that provides the extra functionality is created, and then is destroyed.

The “object wrappers” are different for each primitive type and are called: <code>String</code>, <code>Number</code>, <code>Boolean</code>, <code>Symbol</code> and <code>BigInt</code>. Thus, they provide different sets of methods.

```javascript
let str = "Hello";

alert(str.toUpperCase()); // HELLO
```

Simple, right? Here’s what actually happens in <code>str.toUpperCase()</code>:

1. The string <code>str</code> is a primitive. So in the moment of accessing its property, a special object is created that knows the value of the string, and has useful methods, like <code>toUpperCase()</code>.
2. That method runs and returns a new string (shown by <code>alert</code>).
3. The special object is destroyed, leaving the primitive <code>str</code> alone.

The JavaScript engine highly optimizes this process. It may even skip the creation of the extra object at all. But it must still adhere to the specification and behave as if it creates one.
