# **Data types** ([link source](https://javascript.info/types))

There are eight basic data types in JavaScript.

We can put any type in a variable. Programming languages that allow such things, such as JavaScript, are called "dynamically typed", meaning that there exist data types, but variables are not bound to any of them.

## **Number**

```javascript
let n = 123;
n = 12.345;
```

The number represents both <code>integer</code> and <code>floating</code> point number.

There are many operations for numbers, e.g. multiplication <code>\*</code>, division <code>/</code>, addition <code>+</code>, subtraction <code>-</code>, and so on.

-   <code>Infinity</code> represents the mathematical Infinity ∞ <br>
    We can get it as a result of division by zero:
    ```javascript
    alert(1 / 0); // Infinity
    ```
-   <code>NaN</code> represents a computational error. <br>

    ```javascript
    alert("not a number" / 2); // Infinity
    ```

    <code>NaN</code> is sticky. Any further mathematical operator on <code>NaN</code> returns <code>NaN</code> <br>

    ```javascript
    alert(NaN + 1); // NaN
    alert(3 * NaN); // NaN
    alert("not a number" / 2 - 1); // NaN
    ```

    Exception to that: <code>NaN \*\*h 0</code> is <code>1</code>

## **BigInt**

In JavaScript, the "number" type cannot safely represent integer values larger than <code>2^53-1</code> (that's <code>9007199254740991</code>), or less than <code>-(2^53-1)</code> for negatives.

To be really precise, the “number” type can store larger integers (up to <code>1.7976931348623157 \* 10308</code>), but outside of the safe integer range <code>±(253-1)</code> there’ll be a precision error, because not all digits fit into the fixed 64-bit storage. So an “approximate” value may be stored.

```javascript
console.log(9007199254740991 + 1); // 9007199254740992
console.log(9007199254740991 + 2); // 9007199254740992
```

<code>BigInt</code> type was recently added to the language to represent integers of arbitrary length.

A <code>BigInt</code> value is created by appending n to the end of an integer:

```javascript
// the "n" at the end means it's a BigInt
const bigInt = 1234567890123456789012345678901234567890n;
```

## **String**

A string in JavaScript must be surrounded by quotes.

```javascript
let str = "Hello";
let str2 = "Single quotes are ok too";
let phrase = `can embed another ${str}`;
```

In JavaScript, there are 3 types of quotes.

1. Double quotes: <code>"Hello"</code>.
2. Single quotes: <code>'Hello'</code>.
3. Backticks: <code>`Hello`</code>.

Backticks are “extended functionality” quotes. They allow us to embed variables and expressions into a string by wrapping them in <code>${…}</code>, for example:

```javascript
let name = "John";

// embed a variable
alert(`Hello, ${name}!`); // Hello, John!

// embed an expression
alert(`the result is ${1 + 2}`); // the result is 3
```

## **Boolean (logical type)**

The boolean type has only two values: <code>true</code> and <code>false</code>.

This type is commonly used to store yes/no values: <code>true</code> means “yes, correct”, and <code>false</code> means “no, incorrect”.

```javascript
let nameFieldChecked = true; // yes, name field is checked
let ageFieldChecked = false; // no, age field is not checked
```

Boolean values also come as a result of comparisons:

```javascript
let isGreater = 4 > 1;

alert(isGreater); // true (the comparison result is "yes")
```

## **The "null" value**

The special null value does not belong to any of the types described above.

It forms a separate type of its own which contains only the null value:

```javascript
let age = null;
```

In JavaScript, <code>null</code> is not a “reference to a non-existing object” or a “null pointer” like in some other languages.

It’s just a special value which represents “nothing”, “empty” or “value unknown”.

## **The "undefined" value**

The special value <code>undefined</code> also stands apart. It makes a type of its own, just like <code>null</code>.

The meaning of <code>undefined</code> is “value is not assigned”.

If a variable is declared, but not assigned, then its value is <code>undefined</code>:

```javascript
let age;

alert(age); // shows "undefined"
```

Technically, it is possible to explicitly assign undefined to a variable:

```javascript
let age = 100;

// change the value to undefined
age = undefined;

alert(age); // "undefined"
```

Normally, one uses null to assign an “empty” or “unknown” value to a variable, while undefined is reserved as a default initial value for unassigned things.

## **Objects and Symbols**

The <code>object</code> type is special.

All other types are called “primitive” because their values can contain only a single thing (be it a string or a number or whatever). In contrast, objects are used to store collections of data and more complex entities.

The <code>symbol</code> type is used to create unique identifiers for objects

## **The typeof operator**

The <code>typeof</code> operator returns the type of the operand.

A call to <code>typeof x</code> returns a string with the type name:

```javascript
typeof undefined; // "undefined"

typeof 0; // "number"

typeof 10n; // "bigint"

typeof true; // "boolean"

typeof "foo"; // "string"

typeof Symbol("id"); // "symbol"

typeof Math; // "object"  (1)

typeof null; // "object"  (2)

typeof alert; // "function"  (3)
```

(1). <code>Math</code> is a built-in object that provides mathematical operations.

(2). The result of <code>typeof null</code> is <code>"object"</code>. That’s an officially recognized error in <code>typeof</code>, coming from very early days of JavaScript and kept for compatibility. Definitely, <code>null</code> is not an object. It is a special value with a separate type of its own. The behavior of <code>typeof</code> is wrong here.

(3). The result of <code>typeof alert</code> is <code>"function"</code>, because <code>alert</code> is a function.
