# **Comparisons** ([resource](https://javascript.info/comparison))

In JavaScript they are written like this:

-   Greater/less than: <code>a > b</code>, <code>a < b</code>.
-   Greater/less than or equals: <code>a >= b</code>, <code>a <=b</code>
-   Equals: <code>a == b</code>,
-   Not equals: <code>a != b</code>

## **Boolean is result**

All comparison operators return a boolean value

-   <code>true</code> - means "yes", "correct" or "the truth".
-   <code>false</code> - means "no", "wrong" or "not the truth".

```javascript
alert(2 > 1); // true (correct)
alert(2 == 1); // false (wrong)
alert(2 != 1); // true (correct)
```

A comparison result can be assigned to a variable, just like any value

```javascript
let result = 5 > 4; // assign the result of the comparison
alert(result); // true
```

## **String comparison**

Strings are compared letter-by-letter

```javascript
alert("Z" > "A"); // true
alert("Glow" > "Glee"); // true
alert("Bee" > "Be"); // true
```

The algorithm to compare two strings is simple:

1. Compare the first character of both strings.
2. If the first character from the first string is greater (or less) than the other string’s, then the first string is greater (or less) than the second. We’re done.
3. Otherwise, if both strings’ first characters are the same, compare the second characters the same way.
4. Repeat until the end of either string.
5. If both strings end at the same length, then they are equal. Otherwise, the longer string is greater.

## **Comparison of different types**

When comparing values of different types, JavaScript converts the values to numbers.

```javascript
alert("2" > 1); // true, string '2' becomes a number 2
alert("01" == 1); // true, string '01' becomes a number 1
```

For boolean values, <code>true</code> becomes <code>1</code> and <code>false</code> becomes <code>0</code>.

```javascript
alert(true == 1); // true
alert(false == 0); // true
```

## **Strict equality**

A regular equality check == has a problem. It cannot differentiate 0 from false.

```javascript
alert(0 == false); // true
```

The same thing happens with an empty string

```javascript
alert("" == false); // true
```

This happens because operands of different types are converted to numbers by the equality operator <code>==.</code> An empty string, just like <code>false</code>, becomes a zero.

### **A strict equality operator <code>===</code> checks the equality without type conversion.**

In other words, if <code>a</code> and <code>b</code> are of different types, then <code>a === b</code> immediately returns <code>false</code> without an attempt to convert them.

```javascript
alert(0 === false); // false, because the types are different
```

There is also a “strict non-equality” operator !== analogous to !=.

## **Comparison with null and undefined**

### **For a strict equality check <code>===</code>**

These values are different, because each of them is a different type.

```javascript
alert(null === undefined); // false
```

### **For a none-strict check <code>==</code>**

There’s a special rule. These two are a “sweet couple”: they equal each other (in the sense of <code>==</code>), but not any other value.

```javascript
alert(null == undefined); // true
```

### **For maths and other comparisons <code>< > >= <=</code>**

<code>null/undefined</code> are converted to numbers: <code>null</code> becomes <code>0</code>, while <code>undefined</code> becomes <code>NaN</code>.

## **Strange result: null vs 0**

```javascript
alert(null > 0); // (1) false
alert(null == 0); // (2) false
alert(null >= 0); // (3) true
```

Mathematically, that’s strange. The last result states that “<code>null</code> is greater than or equal to zero”, so in one of the comparisons above it must be <code>true</code>, but they are both false.

The reason is that an equality check <code>==</code> and comparisons <code>> < >= <=</code> work differently. Comparisons convert <code>null</code> to a number, treating it as <code>0</code>. That’s why (3) <code>null >= 0</code> is true and (1) <code>null > 0</code> is false.

On the other hand, the equality check <code>==</code> for <code>undefined</code> and <code>null</code> is defined such that, without any conversions, they equal each other and don’t equal anything else. That’s why (2) <code>null == 0</code> is false.

## **An incomparable undefined**

The value <code>undefined</code> shouldn’t be compared to other values:

```javascript
alert(undefined > 0); // false (1)
alert(undefined < 0); // false (2)
alert(undefined == 0); // false (3)
```

We get these results because:

-   Comparisons <code>(1)</code> and <code>(2)</code> return <code>false</code> because <code>undefined</code> gets converted to <code>NaN</code> and <code>NaN</code> is a special numeric value which returns <code>false</code> for all comparisons.
-   The equality check <code>(3)</code> returns <code>false</code> because <code>undefined</code> only equals <code>null</code>, <code>undefined</code>, and no other value.
