# **Logical operators**

## **|| (OR)**

The “OR” operator is represented with two vertical line symbols

```javascript
result = a || b;
```

In classical programming, the logical OR is meant to manipulate boolean values only. If any of its arguments are <code>true</code>, it returns <code>true</code>, otherwise it returns <code>false</code>.

If an operand is not a boolean, it’s converted to a boolean for the evaluation.

```javascript
// works just like if( true || false )
if (1 || 0) {
	alert("truthy!");
}
```

## **OR "||" finds the first truthy value**

Given multiple OR’ed values

```javascript
result = value1 || value2 || value3;
```

The OR || operator does the following:

-   Evaluates operands from left to right.
-   For each operand, converts it to boolean. If the result is <code>true</code>, stops and returns the original value of that operand
-   If all operands have been evaluated (i.e. all were <code>false</code>), returns the last operand.

1. **Getting the first truthy value from a list of variables or expressions.**

For instance, we have <code>firstName</code>, <code>lastName</code> and <code>nickName</code> variables, all optional (i.e. can be undefined or have falsy values).

Let’s use OR <code>||</code> to choose the one that has the data and show it (or <code>"Anonymous"</code> if nothing set):

```javascript
let firstName = "";
let lastName = "";
let nickName = "SuperCoder";

alert(firstName || lastName || nickName || "Anonymous"); // SuperCoder
```

If all variables were falsy, <code>"Anonymous"</code> would show up.

2. **Short-circuit evaluation.**

```javascript
true || alert("not printed");
false || alert("printed");
```

## **&& (AND)**

The AND operator is represented with two ampersands &&.

In classical programming, AND returns true if both operands are truthy and false otherwise.

```javascript
alert(true && true); // true
alert(false && true); // false
alert(true && false); // false
alert(false && false); // false
```

## **AND "&&" finds the first falsy value**

Given multiple AND’ed values.

```javascript
result = value1 && value2 && value3;
```

The AND <code>&&</code> operator does the following:

-   Evaluates operands from left to right.
-   For each operand, converts it to a boolean. If the result is <code>false</code>, stops and returns the original value of that operand.
-   If all operands have been evaluated (i.e. all were truthy), returns the last operand.

In other words, AND returns the first falsy value or the last value if none were found.

<span style="background-color:yellow;padding:5px;font-weight:500">The rules above are similar to OR. The difference is that AND returns the first falsy value while OR returns the first truthy one.</span>

> [!INFO]
>
> Precedence of AND <code>&&</code> is higher than OR <code>||</code>
> So the code <code>a && b || c && d</code> is essentially the same as if the <code>&&</code> expressions were in parentheses: <code>(a && b) || (c && d)</code>.

## **! (NOT)**

The boolean NOT operator is represented with an exclamation sign !.

```javascript
result = !value;
```

The operator accepts a single argument and does the following:

1. Converts the operand to boolean type: true/false.
2. Returns the inverse value.

```javascript
alert(!true); // false
alert(!0); // true
```

A double NOT !! is sometimes used for converting a value to boolean type

```javascript
alert(!!"non-empty string"); // true
alert(!!null); // false
```
