# **Recursion and stack** ((link resource)[https://javascript.info/recursion])

## **Two ways of thinking**

For something simple to start with - let's write a function <code>pow(x, n)</code> that raises <code>x</code> to a natural power of <code>n</code>. In other words, multiplies <code>x</code> by itself <code>n</code> times.

The are two ways to implement it.

1. Iterative thinking: the <code>for</code> loop:

```javascript
function pow(x, n) {
	let result = 1;

	// multiply result by x n times in the loop
	for (let i = 0; i < n; i++) {
		result *= x;
	}

	return result;
}

alert(pow(2, 3)); // 8
```

2. Recursive thinking: simplify the task and call self:

```javascript
function pow(x, n) {
	if (n == 1) {
		return x;
	} else {
		return x * pow(x, n - 1);
	}
}

alert(pow(2, 3)); // 8
```

Please note how the recursive variant is fundamentally different.

When <code>pow(x, n)</code> is called, the execution splits into two branches.

```javascript
              if n==1  = x
             /
pow(x, n) =
             \
              else     = x * pow(x, n - 1)
```

1. If <code>n === 1</code>, then everything is trivial. It is called the base of recursive, because it immediately produces the obvious result: <code>pow(x, 1)</code> equals <code>x</code>.

2. Otherwise, we can represent <code>pow(x, n)</code> as <code>x \* pow(x, n - 1)</code>.

We can also say that <code>pow</code> recursively calls itself till n === 1.

For example: <code>pow(2, 4)</code>

1. pow(2, 4) = 2 \* pow(2, 3)
2. pow(2, 3) = 2 \* pow(2, 2)
3. pow(2, 2) = 2 \* pow(2, 1)
4. pow(2, 1) = 2

So, the recursion reduces a function call to a simpler one, and then - to even more simpler, and so on, until the result becomes obvious.

The maximal number of nested calls (including the first one) is called recursion depth. In our case, it will be exactly <code>n</code>.

## **The execution context and stack**

The information about the process of execution of a running function is stored in its _execution context_.

The <code>execution context</code> is an internal data structure that contains details about the execution of a function: where the control flow is now, the current variables, the value of <code>this</code> (we don't use it here) and few other internal details.

One function call has exactly one execution context associated with it.

When a function makes a nested call, the following happens:

-   The current function is paused.
-   The execution context associated with it remembered in a special data structure called _execution context stack_.
-   The nested call executes.
-   After it ends, the old execution context is retrieved from the stack, and the outer function is resumed from where it stopped.

### **pow(2, 3)**

In the beginning of the call <code>pow(2, 3)</code> the execution context will store variables: <code>x = 2, n = 3</code>, the execution flow is at line <code>1</code> of the function.

[Context: { x: 2, n: 3, at line 1 }]

That's when the function starts to execute. The condition <code>n === 1</code> is falsy, so the flow continues into the second branch of <code>if</code>:

The variables are same, but the lines changes, so the context is now:

[Context: { x: 2, n: 3, at line 5 }]

### **pow(2, 2)**

To do a nested call, JavaScript remembers the current execution context in the _execution context stack_.

Here we call the same function <code>pow</code>, but it absolutely doesn't matter. The process is the same for all functions.

1. The current context is "remembered" on top of stack.
2. The new context is created for the subcall.
3. When the subcall is finished - the previous context is popped from the stack, and its execution continues.

Here's the context stack when we entered the subcall <code>pow(2, 2)</code>:

**[Context: { x: 2, n: 2, at line 1 }] call: pow(2, 2)** <br/>
[Context: { x: 2, n: 3, at line 5 }] call: pow(2, 3)

The new current execution context is on top (and bold), and previous remembered contexts are below.

When we finish the subcall - it is easy to resume the previous context, because it keeps both variables and the exact place of the code where it stopped.

### **pow(2, 1)**

The process repeats: a new subcall is made at line <code>5</code>, now with arguments <code>x = 2</code>, <code>n = 1</code>.

A new execution context is created, the previous one is pushed on top of the stack.

**[Context: { x: 2, n: 1, at line 1 }] call: pow(2, 1)** <br/>
[Context: { x: 2, n: 2, at line 5 }] call: pow(2, 2)
[Context: { x: 2, n: 3, at line 5 }] call: pow(2, 3)

### **The exit**

During the execution of <code>pow(2, 1)</code>, unlike before, the condition <code>n === 1</code> is truthy, so the first branch of <code>if</code> works:

```javascript
function pow(x, n) {
	if (n == 1) {
		return x;
	} else {
		return x * pow(x, n - 1);
	}
}
```

There are no more nested calls, so the function finishes, returning <code>2</code>.

As the function finishes, its execution context is not needed anymore, so it's removed from the memory.
The previous one is restored off the top of the stack.

**[Context: { x: 2, n: 2, at line 5 }] call: pow(2, 2)**
[Context: { x: 2, n: 3, at line 5 }] call: pow(2, 3)

The execution of <code>pow(2, 2)</code> is resumed. It has the result of the subcall <code>pow(2, 1)</code>, so it also can finish the evaluation of <code>x \* pow(x, n - 1)</code>, returning <code>4</code>.

Then the previous context is restored:

**[Context: { x: 2, n: 3, at line 5 }] call: pow(2, 3)**

When it finishes, we have a result of <code>pow(2, 3) = 8</code>

The recursion depth in this case was: **3**.

**Any recursion can be rewritten as a loop. The loop variant usually can be made more effective.**

## **Recursive traversals**

```javascript
let company = {
	// the same object, compressed for brevity
	sales: [
		{name: "John", salary: 1000},
		{name: "Alice", salary: 1600},
	],
	development: {
		sites: [
			{name: "Peter", salary: 2000},
			{name: "Alex", salary: 1800},
		],
		internals: [{name: "Jack", salary: 1300}],
	},
};

// The function to do the job
function sumSalaries(department) {
	if (Array.isArray(department)) {
		// case (1)
		return department.reduce((prev, current) => prev + current.salary, 0); // sum the array
	} else {
		// case (2)
		let sum = 0;
		for (let subdep of Object.values(department)) {
			sum += sumSalaries(subdep); // recursively call for subdepartments, sum the results
		}
		return sum;
	}
}

alert(sumSalaries(company)); // 7700
```

## **Recursive structures**

### **Linked List**

Imagine, we want to store an ordered list of objects.

The natural choice would be an array:

```javascript
let arr = [obj1, obj2, obj3, obj4, obj5];
```

...But there's a problem with arrays. The "delete element" and "insert element" operations are expensive.
For instance, <code>arr.unshift(obj)</code> operation has to renumber all elements to make room for a new <code>obj</code>, and if the array is big, it takes time. Same with <code>arr.shift()</code>.

The only structural modifications that do not require mass-renumbering are those that operate with the end of array: <code>arr.push/pop</code>. So an array can be quite slow for big queues, when we have to work with the beginning.

Alternatively, if we really need fast insertion/deletion, we can choose another data structure called a <code>linked list</code>.

The linked list element is recursively defined as an object with.

-   <code>value</code>
-   <code>next</code> property referencing the next linked list element or <code>null</code> if that's the end.

```javascript
let list = {
	value: 1,
	next: {
		value: 2,
		next: {
			value: 3,
			next: {
				value: 4,
				next: null,
			},
		},
	},
};
```
