# **Variable scope, closure** ((link resource)[https://javascript.info/closure])

JavasScript is a very function-oriented language. It gives us a lot of freedom. A function can be created at any moment, passed as an argument to another function. and then called from a totally different place of code later.

## **Code blocks**

If a variable is declared inside a code block <code>{...}</code>, it's only visible inside that block.

```javascript
{
	// do some job with local variables that should not be seen outside

	let message = "Hello"; // only visible in this block

	alert(message); // Hello
}

alert(message); // Error: message is not defined
```

We can use this to isolate a piece of code that does its own task, with variables that only belong to it:

```javascript
{
	// show message
	let message = "Hello";
	alert(message);
}

{
	// show another message
	let message = "Goodbye";
	alert(message);
}
```

For <code>if</code>, <code>for</code>, <code>while</code> and so on, variables declared in <code>{...}</code> are also only visible inside:

```javascript
if (true) {
	let phrase = "Hello!";

	alert(phrase); // Hello!
}

alert(phrase); // Error, no such variable!
```

## **Nested functions**

A function is called "nested" when it is created inside another function.

```javascript
function sayHiBye(firstName, lastName) {
	// helper nested function to use below
	function getFullName() {
		return firstName + " " + lastName;
	}

	alert("Hello, " + getFullName());
	alert("Bye, " + getFullName());
}
```

What's much more interesting, a nested function can be returned: either as a property of a new object or as a result by itself. It can then be used somewhere else. No matter where, it still has access to the same outer variables.

```javascript
function makeCounter() {
	let count = 0;

	return function () {
		return count++;
	};
}

let counter = makeCounter();

alert(counter()); // 0
alert(counter()); // 1
alert(counter()); // 2
```

## **Lexical Environment**

### **Step 1. Variables**

In JavaScript, every running function, code block <code>{...}</code>, and the script as a whole have an internal (hidden) associated object know as the Lexical Environment.

The Lexical Environment object consist of two parts:

1. _Environment Record_ - an object that stores all local variables as its properties (and some other information like the value of <code>this</code>).

2. A reference to the outer _lexical environment_, the one associated with the outer code.

**A "variable" is just a property of the special internal object, <code>Environment Record</code>. "To get or change a variable" means "to get or change a property of that object.**

In this simple code without functions, there is only one Lexical Environment:

```javascript
let parse = 'Hello'; ----> Lexical Environment: [phrase: "Hello"] - Outer -> null
```

This is the so-called global Lexical Environment, associated with the whole script.

One the picture above, the rectangle means Environment Record (variable store) and the arrow means the outer reference. The global Lexical Environment has no outer reference, that's why the arrow points to <code>null</code>.

```javascript
Execution start     ------> [phrase: <uninitialized>] - Outer -> null
let phrase;         ------> [phrase: undefined]
phrase = "Hello";   ------> [phrase: "Hello"]
phrase = "Bye";     ------> [phrase: "Bye"]
```

Rectangles on the right-hand side demonstrate how the global Lexical Environment changes during the execution:

1. When the script starts, the Lexical Environment is pre-populated with all declared variables.
    - Initially, the are in the "Uninitialized" state. That's a special internal state, it means that the engine knows about the variable, but it cannot be referenced until it has been declared with <code>let</code>. It's almost the same as if the variable didn't exist.
2. Then <code>let phrase</code> definition appears. There's no assignment yet, so its value is <code>undefined</code>. We can use the variable from this point forward.
3. <code>phrase</code> is assigned a value.
4. <code>phrase</code> changes the value.

> [!NOTE]
>
> Everything looks simple for now, right?
>
> -   A variable is a property of a special internal object, associated with the currently executing block/function/script.
> -   Working with variables is actually working with the properties of that object.

### **Step 2. Function Declarations**

A function is also a value, like variable.

**The difference is that a Function Declaration is instantly fully initialized.**

When a Lexical Environment is created, a Function Declaration immediately becomes a ready-to-use function (unlike <code>let</code>, that is unusable till the declaration).

That's why we can use a function, declared as Function Declaration, even before the declaration it itself.

```javascript
execution start                 ----- [phrase: <uninitialized>] - Outer -> null
                                      [say: function          ]
let phrase = "Hello";

function say(name) {
    alert(`${phrase}, ${name}`);
}
```

Naturally, this behavior only applies to Function Declarations, not Function Expression where we assign a function to a variable, such as <code>let say = function(name)...</code>

### **Step 3. Inner and outer Lexical Environment**

When a function runs, at the beginning of the call, a new Lexical Environment is created automatically to store local variables and parameters of the call.

```javascript
let phrase = "Hello";
                                    ____  Lexical Environment of the call
function say(name) {                    |
	alert(`${phrase}, ${name}`);        | -> [name: "John"] ----- Outer ---> [say: function  ] - Outer -> null
}                                   ____|                                    [phrase: "Hello"]

say("John"); // Hello, John
```

During the function call we have two Lexical Environments: the inner one (for the function call) and the outer one (global):

-   The inner Lexical Environment corresponds to the current execution of <code>say</code>. It has a single property: <code>name</code>, the function argument. We called <code>say("John")</code>, so the value of the <code>name</code> is <code>John</code>.
-   The outer Lexical Environment is the global Lexical Environment. It has the <code>phrase</code> variable and the function itself.

**When the code wants to access to variable - the inner Lexical Environment is searched first, then the outer one, then the more outer one and so on until the global one.**

If a variable is not found anywhere, that's an error in strict mode (without <code>use strict</code>, an assignment to a non-existing variable creates a new global variable, for compatibility with old code).

In this example the search proceeds as follows:

-   For the <code>name</code> variable, the <code>alert</code> inside <code>say</code> finds it immediately in the inner Lexical Environment.
-   When it wants to access <code>phrase</code> locally, so it follows the reference to the outer Lexical Environment and finds it there.

```javascript
let phrase = "Hello";
                                    ____  Lexical Environment of the call
function say(name) {                    |
	alert(`${phrase}, ${name}`);        | -> [name: "John"] ----- Outer ---> [say: function  ] - Outer -> null
}                                   ____|                                    [phrase: "Hello"]
                          |_______________________⬆️
                |___________________________________________________________________⬆️
say("John"); // Hello, John
```

### **Step 4. Returning a function**

```javascript
function makeCounter() {
	let count = 0;

	return function () {
		return count++;
	};
}

let counter = makeCounter();
```

At the beginning of each <code>makeCounter()</code> call, a new Lexical Environment object is created, to store variables for this <code>makerCounter</code> run.

So we have two nested Lexical Environments, just like in the example above:

```javascript
function makeCounter() {         Lexical Environment        global Lexical Environment
➡️  let count = 0;               of makeCounter() call
    return function () {         [count: 0]                 [makeCounter: function ] -- Outer --> null
        return count++;                                     [counter: undefined    ]
    };
}

let counter = makeCounter();
```

What's different is that, during the execution of <code>makerCounter()</code>, a tiny nested function is created of only one line: <code>return count++</code>. We don't run it yet, only create.

All functions remember the Lexical Environment in which they were made. Technically, there's no magic here: all functions have the hidden property named <code>[[Environment]]</code>, that keeps the reference to the Lexical Environment where the function was created:

```javascript
function makeCounter() {
    let count = 0;
➡️  return function () { [[Environment]]         [count: 0]       [makeCounter: function ] -- Outer --> null
        return count++;                                           [counter: undefined    ]
    };
}

let counter = makeCounter();
```

So, <code>counter.[[Environment]]</code> has the reference to <code>{ count: 0 }</code> Lexical Environment. That's how the function remembers where it was created, no matter where it's called. The <code>[[Environment]]</code> reference is set once and forever at function creation time.

Later, when <code>counter()</code> is called, a new Lexical Environment is created for the call, and its outer Lexical Environment reference is taken from <code>counter.[[Environment]]</code>:

```javascript
function makeCounter() {
    let count = 0;
    return function () {
➡️        return count++;  [<empty>] -- Outer -->  [count: 0] -- Outer -->     [makeCounter: function ] -- Outer --> null
    };                                                                         [counter: undefined    ]
}

let counter = makeCounter();

alert( counter() );
```

Now when the code inside <code>counter()</code> looks for <code>count</code> variable, it first searches its own Lexical Environment (empty, as there are no local variables there), then the Lexical Environment of the outer <code>makeCounter()</code> call, where it finds and changes it.

**A variable is updated in the Lexical Environment where it lives.**

## **Garbage collection**

Usually, a Lexical Environment is removed from memory with all the variables after the function call finishes.
That's because there are no references to it. As any JavaScript object, it's only kept in memory while it's reachable.

However, if there's a nested function that is still reachable after the end of a function, then it has [[Environment]] property that references the lexical environment.

```javascript
function f() {
	let value = 123;

	return function () {
		alert(value);
	};
}

let g = f(); // g.[[Environment]] stores a reference to the Lexical Environment
// of the corresponding f() call
```

### **Real-life optimizations**

As we've seen, in theory while a function is alive, all outer variables are also retained.

But in practice, JavaScript engines try to optimize that. They analyze variable usage and if it's obvious from the code that an outer variables is not used - it is removed.
