# **Scheduling: setTimeout and setInterval** ((link resource)[https://javascript.info/settimeout-setinterval])

We may decide to execute a function not right now, but at a certain time later. That's called "scheduling a call".

There are two methods for it:

-   <code>setTimeout</code> -> allows us to run a function once after the interval of time.
-   <code>setInterval</code> -> allows us to run a function repeatedly, staring after the interval of time, then repeating continuously at that interval.

## **setTimeout**

```javascript
let timerId = setTimeout(func|code, [delay], [arg1], [arg2], ...);
```

Parameters:

<code>func|code</code> -> function or a string of code to execute. Usually, that's a function.

<code>delay</code> -> the delay before run, in milliseconds (1000ms = 1s), default = 0

<code>arg1, arg2, ...</code> -> arguments for the function

## **Canceling with clearTimeout**

A call to <code>setTimeout</code> returns a "timer identifier" <code>timerId</code> that we can use to cancel the execution.

```javascript
let timerId = setTimeout(...);
clearTimeout(timerId);
```

## **setInterval**

The syntax: (The <code>setInterval</code> method has the same <code>setTimeout</code>)

```javascript
let timerId = setInterval(func|code, [delay], [arg1], [arg2], ...)
```

To stop further calls, we should call <code>clearInterval(timerId)</code>.

```javascript
// repeat with the interval of 2 seconds
let timerId = setInterval(() => alert("tick"), 2000);

// after 5 seconds stop
setTimeout(() => {
	clearInterval(timerId);
	alert("stop");
}, 5000);
```

## **Nested setTimeout**

There are two ways of running something regularly.

One is <code>setInterval</code>. The other one is a nested <code>setTimeout</code>, like this:

```javascript
/** instead of:
let timerId = setInterval(() => alert('tick'), 2000);
*/

let timerId = setTimeout(function tick() {
	alert("tick");
	timerId = setTimeout(tick, 2000); // (*)
}, 2000);
```

**Nested <code>setTimeout</code> allows to set the delay between the executions more precisely than <code>setInterval</code>.**
**The real delay between <code>func</code> calls for <code>setInterval</code> is less than in the code!**

## **Zero delay setTimeout**

There's a special use case: <code>setTimeout(func, 0)</code>, or just <code>setTimeout(func)</code>

The schedules the execution of <code>func</code> as soon as possible. But the scheduler will invoke it only after the currently executing script is complete.
