# **Object** ([link resource](https://javascript.info/object))

As we know from the chapter Data types, there are eight data types in JavaScript. Seven of them are called “primitive”, because their values contain only a single thing (be it a string or a number or whatever).

In contrast, objects are used to store keyed collections of various data and more complex entities.

An object can be created with figure brackets <code>{…}</code> with an optional list of _properties_. A property is a “key: value” pair, where <code>key</code> is a string (also called a “property name”), and <code>value</code> can be anything.

An empty object can be created using one of two syntaxes:

```javascript
let user = new Object(); // "object constructor" syntax
let user = {}; // "object literal" syntax
```

Usually, the figure brackets <code>{...}</code> are used. That declaration is called an _object literal_.

## **Literals and properties**

We can immediately put some properties into <code>{...}</code> as “key: value” pairs:

```javascript
// an object
let user = {
	name: "John", // by key "name" store value "John"
	age: 30, // by key "age" store value 30
};
```

Property values are accessible using the dot notation:

```javascript
// get property values of the object:
alert(user.name); // John
alert(user.age); // 30
```

The value can be of any type. Let’s add a boolean one:

```javascript
user.isAdmin = true;
```

To remove a property, we can use the delete operator:

```javascript
delete user.age;
```

We can also use multi-word property names, but then they must be quoted:

```javascript
let user = {
	name: "John",
	age: 30,
	"likes birds": true, // multi-word property name must be quoted
};
```

The last property in the list may end with a comma:

```javascript
let user = {
	name: "John",
	age: 30,
};
```

That is called a “trailing” or “hanging” comma. Makes it easier to add/remove/move around properties, because all lines become alike

## **Square brackets**

The dot requires the key to be a valid variable identifier. That implies: contains no spaces, doesn’t start with a digit and doesn’t include special characters (<code>$</code> and <code>\_</code> are allowed).

There’s an alternative “square bracket notation” that works with any string:

```javascript
let user = {};

// set
user["likes birds"] = true;

// get
alert(user["likes birds"]); // true

// delete
delete user["likes birds"];
```

Square brackets also provide a way to obtain the property name as the result of any expression – as opposed to a literal string – like from a variable as follows:

```javascript
let key = "likes birds";

// same as user["likes birds"] = true;
user[key] = true;
```
